Application and Assessment of Deep Learning for the 

Generation of Potential NMDA Receptor Antagonists 

Katherine J. Schultz, Sean M. Colby, Yasemin Yesiltepe, Jamie R. Nuñez, Monee Y. McGrady, 

Ryan R. Renslow* 

Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, Richland, WA, USA. 

ABSTRACT. Uncompetitive antagonists of the N-methyl D-aspartate receptor (NMDAR) have 

demonstrated therapeutic benefit in the treatment of neurological diseases such as Parkinson’s and 

Alzheimer’s, but some also cause dissociative effects that have led to the synthesis of illicit drugs. 

The  ability  to  generate  NMDAR  antagonists in  silico is  therefore  desirable  both  for  new 

medication  development  and  for  preempting  and  identifying  new  designer  drugs.  Recently, 

generative deep learning models have been applied to de novo drug design as a means to expand 

the amount of chemical space that can be explored for potential drug-like compounds. In this study, 

we assess the application of a generative model to the NMDAR to achieve two primary objectives: 

(i)  the  creation  and  release  of  a  comprehensive  library  of  experimentally  validated  NMDAR 

phencyclidine (PCP) site antagonists to assist the drug discovery community and (ii) an analysis 

of both the advantages conferred by applying such generative artificial intelligence models to drug 

design and the current limitations of the approach. We apply, and provide source code for, a variety 

of ligand- and structure-based assessment techniques used in standard drug discovery analyses to 

the  deep  learning-generated  compounds.  We  present  twelve  candidate  antagonists  that  are  not 

 

1 

available in existing chemical databases to provide an example of what this type of workflow can 

achieve, though synthesis and experimental validation of these compounds is still required. 

INTRODUCTION. Deep learning (DL)-based technology has been widely adopted in realms such 

as natural language processing and computer vision. The success of DL frameworks in those arenas 

led to their more recent adaption to the cheminformatics field, where they have been employed as 

tools to further elucidate topics ranging from chemical property prediction to synthesis planning.1-

2 Furthermore, DL is playing an increasingly important role in the de novo design of molecules 

with desired chemical properties. It is estimated that there are up to 1060 synthesizable drug-like 

organic compounds in chemical space, over 99.9% of which are theoretically accessible but have 

never  been  synthesized.3-4  The  in  silico  design  and  property  prediction  of  biologically  active 

compounds is desirable both as a means to explore previously inaccessible areas of chemical space 

and  as  a  labor-,  cost-,  and  time-effective  alternative  to  the  in  vitro  assessment  of  lead-like 

compounds via high throughput screening. As such, there has been a sizable improvement to in 

silico methodologies for novel molecule generation, discovery, and property prediction in the past 

decade.  These  computer-assisted  drug  discovery  (CADD)  methods  also  have  the  potential  to 

achieve much higher hit-finding rates than laboratory-based high-throughput screening.5 While the 

application of machine learning to the CADD pipeline in the areas of target, property, and activity 

prediction  is  widespread,6-7  its  application  to  de  novo  molecular  generation  is  a  more  recent 

development—one that, while not currently without notable limitations, is demonstrating great 

potential. 

One standard in silico approach to de novo molecular design is to build a molecule piecewise or 

atom-wise inside a pocket that represents the target protein.8 However, this method can result in 

molecules that are difficult to synthesize, overfit to their target, or both. Another approach is to 

 

2 

use  virtual  chemical  reactions  to  build  novel  molecules.  While  this  method  addresses  the 

synthesizability problem, it limits the scope of chemical space that can be explored.1, 9 To avoid 

these  pitfalls,  inverse  quantitative  structure-activity  relationships  (inverse-QSAR)  has  been 

proposed as an alternate approach to de novo molecular design. The methodology employed by 

inverse-QSAR is to generate compounds by sampling the region of chemical space defined by the 

properties of molecules with known activity.10-12 To this end, DL can be utilized both for learning 

the property space encompassed by the active compounds and for generating novel molecules from 

this  space.9,  13-21  A  promising  recent  development  involves  the  application  of  variational 

autoencoders  (VAEs)22  to  de  novo  molecular  design.14,  23-25  VAEs  are  generative  DL  models 

comprised of two connected networks—an encoder and a decoder. The encoder converts input 

data to a compact representation, shaping the network’s continuous – or latent – space as it learns 

patterns in the input. The decoder samples from the latent space to generate the output. In the case 

of  de  novo  design,  the  VAE’s  latent  space  represents  a  chemical  space  within  which  known 

molecules  can  be  placed  and  from  which  novel  molecular  structures  can  be  derived.  VAE 

architecture is particularly compelling for inverse-QSAR due to its ability to accommodate two-

way traversal: chemical property prediction given input molecular structure or structure generation 

from desired properties.  

Recently,  our  group  developed  the  VAE-based  software  DarkChem  for  mapping  chemical 

properties to molecular structure.26 It was originally intended as a tool for in silico metabolomics 

to aid in the identification of small molecules in complex samples. DarkChem’s latent space is 

shaped using calculable chemical properties, such as molecular mass and collision cross section (a 

gas  phase  property  measured  by  ion  mobility  spectrometry),  to  enable  rapid  construction  of 

massive  molecular  libraries  with  reduced  reliance  on  experimentation.  DarkChem  also  shows 

 

3 

promise in de novo drug design. When a small set of known channel blockers of the NMDAR (N-

methyl  D-aspartate  receptor)  were  used  as  input  to  DarkChem  to  generate  putative  novel 

compounds,  principal  component  analysis  (PCA)  revealed  that  the  DarkChem-generated 

molecules clustered well according to mass and CCS and warranted a more thorough investigation 

of their capacity as potential NMDAR channel blockers. In an effort to further elucidate both the 

advantages and shortcomings of nascent artificial intelligence-assisted generative approaches like 

DarkChem,  we  chose  to  enter  the  field  of  computational  drug  design  by  exploring  how  our 

computer-generated  molecules  perform  when  applied  to  filtering  and  assessment  methods 

commonly used during virtual screening of existing large molecular databases. It should be noted 

that while synthesizability was assessed during the course of this study, none of the computer-

generated molecules have been synthesized, as this is outside the scope of our work. Our findings 

are intended to offer guidance both to the development of future versions of DarkChem and to the 

drug design community. We opted to conduct our exploration on a target that has received renewed 

interest for drug leads of late,27-29 yet is lacking in readily available and accessible information 

necessary  for  many  CADD  techniques:  the  NMDAR  phencyclidine  (PCP)  site.  As  such,  a 

secondary goal of this study was to provide a comprehensive PCP site library freely to the research 

community. Furthermore, we evaluated our generative artificial intelligence (AI) model against a 

more challenging target – an active site located in the ion channel of a complex plasma membrane 

protein only recently resolved by X-ray crystallography30 – than those used in literature to date, 

which are largely kinases.16, 18, 25, 31-32 

The NMDAR PCP Site 

The NMDAR is a heterotetrameric, ligand- and voltage-gated glutamate receptor expressed in 

the central nervous system (CNS). Irregular NMDAR function is implicated in excitotoxicity and 

 

4 

a host of nervous system disorders including Alzheimer’s, Parkinson’s, and Huntington’s diseases. 

A  connection  between  NMDAR  dysfunction  and  depression  has  also  been  proposed,  but 

experiments aimed at elucidating the mode of action have yielded ambiguous results.33-34 While 

there are multiple binding sites on the NMDAR (Figure 1), open channel blockers that target the 

PCP site in the ion channel of the transmembrane domain (TMD) have received renewed interest 

due to the recent clinical trial successes of ketamine (a PCP site uncompetitive antagonist) in 

treating major depressive disorder.27-29 Memantine is a PCP site antagonist that is well-tolerated 

and effective in the treatment of Parkinson’s and moderate to severe Alzheimer’s disease.35 Many 

other PCP site antagonists, including the site’s namesake drug PCP and the extremely high-affinity 

channel blocker MK-801 (dizocilpine), result in undesirable dissociative effects in humans that 

negate the potential therapeutic benefit they might confer. Further, many PCP analogs have been 

identified in confiscated street drugs and in the post-mortem setting.36 Due to the nature of known 

PCP site antagonists, the potential benefit of generating novel analogous structures is twofold: to 

aid in the discovery of medicinal drug leads for the treatment of neurological disorders and to 

preempt new designer drugs before they hit the market.  
A
B

Figure 1. The NMDAR and some of its notable features. (A) The crystal structure of the NMDAR 
derived from Protein Data Bank accession no. 5UOW (Lu et al., 2017) with the amino-terminal 
domain  (ATD),  ligand-binding  domain  (LBD),  and  transmembrane  domain  (TMD)  regions 

 

 

5 

labeled. NR1 and NR2B subunits are isolated for clarity. The high-affinity channel blocker MK-
801  is  shown  bound  in  the  PCP  site  in  the  inset.  (B)  Cation  flow  and  selected  binding  sites 
including the glycine and glutamate agonist binding sites are depicted in the schematic. 

 

Despite the significant value the NMDAR has as a target, DL-enabled de novo drug design has 

not been applied to the NMDAR to date – in part due to the lack of publicly available ligand-

protein binding data. To address this data scarcity, we have built a comprehensive NMDAR PCP 

site antagonist library (see Supporting Information). Another impediment to CADD application to 

the NMDAR – and particularly to the PCP site – has been the difficulty in resolving the protein in 

its active state via X-ray crystallography due to its complex structure.37 In 2018, however, Song et 

al. succeeded in resolving a PCP site-bound crystal structure of the NMDAR with a correctly 

assembled TMD channel,30 an achievement noted in part for providing a good assessment tool for 

the binding of NMDAR channel blockers.37 We therefore elected to include a docking study of 

PCP site antagonists using this structure as a component of our assessment. 

 

Given the high failure rate of NMDAR antagonists in clinical trials and the frequency with 

which new street drugs that target the PCP site are developed, a primary goal of the molecular 

generation aspect of this study was to produce compounds that are structurally unique compared 

to  known  PCP  site  antagonists  yet  still  retain  predicted  target  activity.  The  discovery  of  new 

molecular  scaffolds  and  chemical  classes  with  PCP  site  activity  has  the  potential  to  aid  the 

development of therapeutics without undesirable dissociative effects. In our effort to explore the 

efficacy and limitation of employing AI for molecular generation while providing comprehensive 

information about PCP site antagonists heretofore missing from existing publicly available small 

molecule databases, we utilized a variety of established in silico techniques currently being used 

to  find  candidate  drug  leads.  These  include  ligand-  and  structure-based  methods  for  activity 

assessment, absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion (ADME) prediction, substructure 

 

6 

analysis,  lead-likeness  filters,  synthesizability  scoring,  and  similarity  metrics.  Ultimately,  we 

found twelve new potential antagonists that passed all of our filtering steps. All structures were 

not present in any public database and contained unique molecular backbones compared to known 

active antagonists. The results of applying these techniques to AI-generated compounds provide 

insight  into  some  of  the  advantages  afforded  by  DL  for  de  novo  drug  design,  as  well  as  the 

obstacles. The limitations we identified have the potential to be useful in guiding both our future 

work and, more broadly, the development of generative machine learning models for targeted 

molecule design. 

 

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION.  

In silico Workflow Strategy  

One of our primary objectives was to assess whether our AI-generated compounds would pass 

in silico screens typically utilized during the CADD process to characterize and filter existing 

compounds or compounds created by other in silico or in vitro means. We therefore developed a 

workflow comprised of both ligand- and structure-based techniques commonly used in the drug 

discovery process to screen AI-generated compounds for potential activity at the NMDAR PCP 

site (Figure 2). Our strategy for the creation of de novo candidate PCP site antagonists was to 

search the chemical space (i.e. the VAE latent space) encompassed by the set of experimentally 

verified PCP site antagonists. This necessitated the creation of a library of known actives to define 

a  region  in  latent  space  from  which  to  sample.  Resulting  generated  compounds  were  filtered 

according to predicted activity at the binding site, favorable molecular docking score, and desirable 

ADME-Toxicity profiles and synthesizability scores. 

 

 

7 

A

B

 

Figure  2.  (A)  Workflow  schematic:  A  PCP  site  library  was  assembled  and  used  as  input  to 
DarkChem  to  train  an  activity  prediction  model  and  collect  baseline  performance  metrics  for 
molecular  docking  simulations.  Generated  candidate  structures  were  assessed  with  the  ligand-
based activity prediction model and the structure-based molecular docking simulation and then 
further filtered. (B) Detailed representation of the filtering process for AI-generated compounds 
with the number of passing compounds displayed below the filtering step. All molecules that pass 
each step are available upon request. 
 

NMDAR PCP Site Molecular Library 

The lack of publicly available comprehensive data on NMDAR channel blockers necessitated 

the construction of a library of NMDAR PCP site antagonists. We created a library that contains 

1,142 NMDAR PCP site antagonists, with 818 compounds having experimentally derived activity 

at the PCP site and 324 compounds having unknown activity. Some of the dominant chemical 

classes 

represented 

include  arylcyclohexylamine,  dibenzocycloalkenamine,  dioxolane, 

benzomorphan, diphenylethylamine, aminoadamantane, aminoalkylcyclohexane, morphinan, and 

guanidine. Classes are primarily defined according to the classifications used by the author(s) in 

 

8 

the  publication  from  which  the  compounds  were  extracted.  If  such  classifications  were  not 

provided, applicable class names already present in the library were applied. The library was built 

from  an  in-depth  literature  search  and  web  scraping  of  online  databases.  A  summary  of  the 

literature-derived library sources is shown in Table 1. Many well-known NMDAR antagonists and 

their analogs are represented, such as PCP, rolicyclidine, ketamine and esketamine, tiletamine, 

lanicemine,  methoxetamine,  dexoxadrol  and  etoxadrol,  memantine,  dextromethorphan  and 

dextrorphan, and dizocilpine (MK-801). The chemical properties of the library entries reveal some 

common trends among them including a low molecular weight (µ: 261.03 Da; σ: 63.79 Da) and 

high  lipophilicity  (µ:  3.75;  σ:  1.29)  compared  to  other  CNS-active  drugs.38  The  library  also 

contains 2,000 decoy molecules—compounds with physicochemical properties that match actives 

but are topologically different and presumed to be inactive at the site of interest. All compounds 

are  represented  by  their  International  Union  of  Pure  and  Applied  Chemistry  (IUPAC)  name, 

common  name  where  applicable,  canonical  simplified  molecular-input  line-entry  specification 

(SMILES), and chemical formula. The library was utilized to define a region in the DarkChem 

latent space to search for novel antagonists, build an activity prediction model during ligand-based 

assessment, and determine baseline molecular docking performance metrics.  

 

 

9 

Table  1.  Summary  of  NMDAR  PCP  site  library  sources.  The  full  library  spreadsheet  is 
available in the Supporting Information. 

Citation  Number of 
Compounds* 

Chemical Class(es) 
Dioxolane 
Aminoacridine 
Arylcyclohexylamine, Diphenylethylamine 
Arylcyclohexylamine, Dibenzocycloalkenamine, 
Octahydrophenanthrenamine 
Arylcyclohexylamine 
Arylcyclohexylamine, Arylcyclohexylmorpholine 
Arylcyclohexylamine, Benzomorphan, Indenopyridine, 
Benz(f)isoquinoline, Dioxolane 
Arylcyclohexylamine, Guanidine 
Phenylpiperidine 
Dibenzocycloalkenamine 
Dibenzocycloalkenamine 
Aminoalkylcyclohexane 
Quinolone 
Tetrahydroisoquinoline, Benzomorphan 
Hexahydrofluorenamine 
Guanidine 
Arylcyclohexylamine 
Diphenylethylamine 
Arylcyclohexylamine 
Arylcyclohexylamine, Propanolamine 
Arylcyclohexylamine, Dioxolane, Benzomorphan 
Arylcyclohexylamine, Isothiocyanate 
Arylcyclohexylamine, Dioxolane, Benzomorphan, 
Benz(f)isoquinoline, Morphinan 
Dibenzocycloalkenamine 
Arylmethylguanidine 
Aminoalkylcyclohexylamine, Tetrahydroisoquinoline, 
Imidazoline 
Arylcyclohexylamine, Imidazoline 
Aminoalkylcyclohexane, Aminoadamantane 
Arylcyclohexylamine, Adamantine, Aminoadamantane, 
Aminoalkylcyclohexane 
Dibenzocycloalkenamine 
Arylcyclohexylamine, Anisylcyclohexylamine 
Arylcyclohexylamine 
Dioxolane 
Arylcyclohexylamine 
Diphenylethylamine 
Dibenzocycloalkenamine 
Arylcyclohexylamine, Arylcycloheptylamine 
Aminoadamantane 
Arylcyclohexylamine, Anisylcyclohexylamine, 
Diphenylethylamine, Benzofuran, Dioxolane 
Morphinan 
Arylcyclohexylamine, Anisylcyclohexylamine 
Arylcyclohexylamine 

*some compounds appear in multiple sources 

Source 
Aepkers & Wünsch, 2005 
Barygin et al., 2009 
Berger et al., 1998, 2009, 2015 
Bigge et al., 1993 
Chaudieu et al., 1989 
Colestock et al., 2018 
Domino & Kamenka, 1988 
Dravid et al., 2007 
Ebert et al., 1998 
Elhallaoui et al., 2003 
Gee et al., 1993, 1994 
Gilling et al., 2007 
Gordon et al., 2001 
Gray et al., 1989 
Hays et al., 1993 
Hu et al., 1997 
Itzhak et al., 1981 
Kang et al., 2017 
Kozikowski & Pang, 1990 
Kozlowski et al., 1986 
Largent et al., 1986 
Linders et al., 1993 
Mendelsohn et al., 1984 
Monn et al., 1990 
Naumiec et al., 2015 
Nicholson & Balster, 2003 
Olmos et al., 1996 
Parsons et al., 1995, 1999 
Rammes et al., 2001 
Rogawski et al., 1991 
Roth et al., 2013 
Sałat et al., 2015 
Sax & Wünsch, 2006 
Sax et al., 2008 
Stefek et al., 1990 
Subramaniam et al., 1996 
Thompson et al., 1990 
Thurkauf et al., 1990 
Tikhonova et al., 2004 
Wallach, 2014 
Wallach et al., 2016 
Wallach & Brandt, 2018 
Werling et al., 2007 
Zarantonello et al., 2011 
Zukin & Zukin, 1979 

39 
40 
41-43 
44 
45 
46 
47 
48 
49 
50 
51,52 
53 
54 
55 
56 
57 
58 
59 
60 
61 
62 
63 
64 
65 
66 
67 
68 
69, 70 
71 
72 
73 
74 
75, 76 
77 
78 
79 
80 
81 

5 
5 
36 
47 
33 
7 
43 
7 
18 
36 
24 
3 
1 
38 
22 
66 
2 
1 
12 
9 
6 
25 
15 
20 
17 
10 
9 
55 
15 
1 
6 
2 
71 
4 
2 
73 
37 
14 

36, 82-85 

86 
87 
88 

77 

2 
12 
31 

 

10 

 

Generation of Potential PCP Site Antagonists 

Our DL-based VAE, DarkChem, was supplied with known actives from the library to seed its 

latent  representation  of chemical  structure,  or  latent space, defining  a  bounded  volume  within 

chemical  space  from  which  to  sample  new  potential  NMDAR  antagonists  (see  Figure  3  and 

Methods).  Ensuing  deduplication  and  SMILES  validity  verification  steps  resulted  in  a  set  of 

198,826  generated  structures.  Among  this  set,  all required chemical  properties for  the  activity 

model could be successfully calculated for 5,629 compounds. The remaining downselection steps, 

which  are  detailed  in  following  sections,  further  reduced  the  candidates  to  twelve  optimized 

potential antagonists (Figure 4), none of which were found in the thirty-one chemical databases 

we cross-referenced. These final putative structures were assessed for their proximity to the set of 

known actives to determine whether generated structures were unique and/or novel, as opposed to 

simple perturbations of the input. The distance between each putative structure and active in the 

128-dimension latent space was computed by L1 norm, as it behaves favorably in high dimensions 

compared to the L2 norm,89 and the closest active was selected for each generated structure (Table 

S5). Example final structures are shown with their closest therapeutic active in latent space in 

Figure 3. The primary drawback to the in silico generation of novel molecules is the unavailability 

of chemical standards for an in vitro assessment of their lead-likeness. When (and if) these de novo 

compounds are synthesized, their ability as PCP site antagonists can be assessed to improve the 

accuracy of the in silico pipeline where needed. 

 
 

 

11 

A
a)

B

b)

c)C

D

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

A

B

C

memantine

D

esketamine

E

ketamine

F

dizocilpine (MK-801)

phencyclidine

dextromethorphan

 

12 

 

Figure 3. (A) DarkChem network schematic: The network involved an encoder (green), a latent 
representation  (orange),  and  a  decoder  (purple).  Additionally,  a  property  predictor  (slate)  was 
attached to the latent representation. For the encoder, layers included SMILES input, character 
embedding, and a series of convolutional layers. The latent representation was a fully connected 
dense layer. The decoder was comprised of convolutional layers, followed by a linear layer with 
softmax  activation  to  yield  outputs.  Finally,  the  property  predictor  was  a  single  dense  layer 
connected to the latent representation with 20% dropout. Reprinted with permission from Colby 
et al., 2019. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (B) Latent space: The first two principal 
components of the 128-dimensional representation are shown, colored by predicted property value 
(top: m/z, bottom: CCS). The representation is a 2D binned statistic of the mean, with grid size 
384 in each principal component dimension. A kernel density estimator is also shown for each 
principal component dimension, emphasizing density of the distribution. In teal is the region of 
latent space encompassed by PCP site antagonists. (C) Close-up of PCP site antagonist region of 
latent space: Points 1-8 represent a selection of known PCP site antagonists, and the therapeutic 
subset  of  known  antagonists  is  represented  as A-F.  (D)  Molecular  structures  corresponding  to 
points 1-8 and A-F. 
 

Ligand-Based Analysis 

Drug  screening  is  a  costly  and  time-consuming  process.  Many  attempts  have  been  made  to 

expedite the process by developing metrics to filter lead-like compounds from large libraries of 

contenders based on the physiocochemical properties of the ligands alone. The most famous of 

these metrics is arguably Lipinski’s Rule of Five (Ro5).90 There are many exceptions to the Ro5, 

however, and numerous other metrics have been developed in an effort to improve upon it. The 

current consensus regarding these rules is that while they are a good starting place for filtering 

candidate compounds, they are far from comprehensive. In addition, the Ro5 and similar rules 

have been demonstrated to be less applicable to CNS active compounds.91 They are, however, 

approachable and easy to implement.  

In  our  work,  once  properties  were  calculated  for  PCP  site  library  compounds,  the  Ro5  and 

several other filters were applied to ascertain whether they could effectively distinguish between 

active and inactive/decoy compounds. None of the filters performed meaningfully better on the 

 

13 

actives, and in fact many filtered out a higher proportion of actives than inactives and decoys. This 

is likely due in part to the highly tuned nature of the inactives and decoys in the library and lends 

further support to the maxim that such rules should only be applied as an early step when filtering 

very large and chemically diverse compound databases. Thus, we applied a more rigorous ligand-

based analysis technique, detailed below, which resulted in a substantially enhanced ability to 

distinguish between active and inactive library compounds. 

Initially,  130  0-,  1-,  and  2-D  properties,  including  atom  and  bond  counts,  functional  group 

counts,  and  topological  indices,  respectively,  were  calculated  for  all  library  compounds  for 

property  analysis.  We  omitted  3-D  properties  because  they  greatly  increase  computational 

resources and often do not achieve superior performance to 2-D QSAR methods.92-94 Applying the 

library  compounds  to  the  principal  component  analysis  (PCA)  space  of  computed  properties 

revealed that the actives tend to cluster tightly while the inactives routinely display much larger 

variance (Figure S1). Calculated chemical properties were applied to supervised machine learning 

activity analysis to build a QSAR model. The number of descriptors used in building the model 

was  chosen  to  balance  the  “curse  of  dimensionality”,  wherein  too  many  descriptors  result  in 

decreased model performance, with the loss of relevant information that can occur with too few 

features.  This  approach  also  follows  the  recommendation  that  for  building  machine  learning 

models for QSAR analysis the number of instances should be at least five times the number of 

features.95 

Although  developed  fairly  recently,  support  vector  machines  (SVM)  have  demonstrated 

significant  value  as  activity  prediction  models.96-97  The  SVM  model  for  PCP  site  activity 

prediction achieved a ten-fold cross-validated accuracy of 0.95, with a weighted average precision 

of 0.98, recall of 0.97, and f1 of 0.97 on the test set (Figure S2). We built the initial classification 

 

14 

models using a training set comprised of samples from only the library actives and inactives, which 

resulted in worse than desired performance due to the scarcity of inactives (N=X). Incorporation 

of decoy compounds (N=Y) to the inactive class resulted in the considerably more accurate and 

robust final model built for activity prediction. Decoys are an integral part of the CADD process, 

used both as controls for assessing docking simulation results and for building QSAR models in 

the  absence  of  sufficient  known  inactive  compounds.  While  there  is  a  degree  of  inherent 

uncertainty  when  using  decoys,  as  presumed  inactivity  does  not  necessarily  equate  to  true 

inactivity, the application of an unpaired t-test on the binding outcomes of a docking study of 

library actives, inactives, and decoys demonstrated statistically significant differences between 

actives and inactives and between actives and decoys that did not exist between inactives and 

decoys. This is discussed in further detail in the next section. These results provided confidence in 

incorporating the decoys to the inactive class for activity model training. To avoid overfitting, a 

frequent pitfall of QSAR models,98 we assessed the robustness of our model using both ten-fold 

cross-validation and a randomly generated test set comprised of data not seen in training. The 

model’s  cross-validated  accuracy  of  0.95  and  AUPR  of  0.95  demonstrate  its  usefulness  as  an 

assessment tool for PCP site activity. The code for the SVM is available as a Python notebook in 

the Supporting Information. The SVM model predicted 628 of the 5,628 generated compounds 

with successfully calculated properties as active. 

Structure-Based Analysis 

There are two 3D crystallographic NMDAR structures with a PCP site-bound ligand available: 

Protein Data Bank (PDB) codes 5UOW99 and 5UN1.30 The structures were compared by running 

trial docking simulations following the same receptor preparation method, after which the higher 

resolution structure 5UN1 (3.6 Å) was chosen for the library and de novo compound docking 

 

15 

studies. AutoDock Vina outputs the top binding poses and scores for each ligand. A ligand’s score 

represents the estimated free energy of binding, where a more negative score corresponds to a 

higher  likelihood  of  binding.  Vina’s  energy  of  binding  estimates  contain  widely  reported 

inconsistencies and should not be assumed to represent correct values for the purposes of ranking, 

but they have been demonstrated to be accurate in predicting binding poses and distinguishing 

between  active  and  inactive  compounds  in  the  aggregate.100  A  common  method  for  docking 

assessment is to determine how well docking scores correlate to experimental binding affinities 

for  a  given  library  of  compounds.  However,  this  approach  is  problematic  due  to  the  fact  that 

experimental binding affinities present in ligand libraries are extracted from multiple sources with 

varying experimental parameters, including the location of the receptor in the body. We therefore 

decided on an alternative approach to docking wherein the ability to distinguish between verified 

active, verified inactive, and decoy compounds using docking scores was assessed. We found that 

the docking scores for the library compounds display a statistically significant difference between 

the active and inactive compounds as well as between the active and decoy compounds (two-tailed 

p < 0.0001 for both), but not between the decoys and inactives (two-tailed p = 0.3, Table S2). This 

result lends support to the use of docking studies for assessing potential activity of novel PCP site 

antagonists  and,  more  generally,  provides  confidence  in  this  approach  to  docking  for  activity 

analysis. 

A noteworthy finding was that the mean docking score for the DarkChem-generated compounds 

was less negative than for any of the library compound classes. While individual docking scores 

were  not  found  to  correlate  with  activity,  the  mean  scores  for  each  library  class  were 

distinguishable. This finding could reflect a shortcoming of the present generative AI approach 

and indicate a need to incorporate receptor structural data into the molecular generation process. 

 

16 

A  comparative  assessment  of  generative  models  with  and  without  the  inclusion  of  structural 

information would be a valuable area for future work, and we are currently expanding DarkChem 

to include hundreds of chemical properties along with a valid-structure discriminator in order to 

improve candidate generation.  

A common bottleneck in DL models is the requirement of large quantities of high-quality data. 

In drug discovery DL applications as in others, more information is typically correlated with better 

model performance.101 Therefore, for this work we selected the 473 molecules with docking scores 

in the actives scoring range to proceed to the next stages of filtering. 

Further Assessment of Generated Compounds and Top Final Leads 

None of the generated structures were found to exist in the thirty-three compound databases that 

were cross-referenced for duplicates. ADME-Toxicity, predicted off-site activity, synthesizability, 

and stability filters were applied to the remaining compounds next (details in Methods). In line 

with the goal of assisting in the identification of unique scaffolds of molecules with PCP site 

activity to aid in the search for potentially therapeutic compounds, the filter tolerances were set to 

be consistent with the properties of known therapeutic actives from the library. This screening 

process  reduced  the  number  of  compounds  to  twelve  finalists  (Figure  4).  As  the  failure  to 

accurately account for breakdown products has been implicated as the cause of many lead failures 

during the drug discovery process,102 we predicted metabolites for each of the twelve candidates 

(see metabolites xlsx file in Supporting Information). 

 

 

17 

A
a)

b)B

a
C 11H 16N 2S
M olec ular Wt. = 208.32 Da

c
C 12H 17NOS
M olec ular Wt. = 223.33 Da

b
C 11H 17NOS
M olec ular Wt. = 211.32 Da

e
C 13H 25NS
M olec ular Wt. = 227.41 Da

f
C 15H 25N
M olec ular Wt. = 219.37 Da

d
C 11H 16N 2S
M olec ular Wt. = 226.38 Da

i
C 15H 3 1N 3
M olec ular Wt. = 253.43 Da

g
C 15H 25N
M olec ular Wt. = 219.37 Da

h
C 14H 29NS 2
M olec ular Wt. = 275.51 Da

k
C 16H 33N 3
M olec ular Wt. = 267.46 Da

l
C 15H 30N 2OS
M olec ular Wt. = 286.48 Da

j
C 16H 31NS
M olec ular Wt. = 269.49 Da

 

 

18 

Figure  4.  (A)  Close-up  of  the  first  two  PCA  dimensions  from  DarkChem’s  latent  space 
encompassed by the twelve generated finalist molecules, labeled as a-l. (B) The twelve generated 
finalist structures with their letter designation corresponding to that in A. 
 

Similarity assessment of the final structures to the library actives training set revealed that the 

generated compounds were unique and not merely simple perturbations of the input. Of the twenty 

most common unique substructures found in at least 50% of the library actives, each substructure 

is represented in no more than 0.25% of the set of generated compounds. In addition, each of the 

final twelve compounds contain only between one and eight of the twenty common substructures 

(Table S3, Table S4). Finalist compounds also display a high degree of uniqueness when compared 

to the training set using L1 distance and Tanimoto score metrics (Figure 5). The most similar active 

training  set  compounds  by  L1  distance  in  128-dimensional  space  and  by  Tanimoto  score  are 

reported  for  each  finalist  molecule  in  Table  S5.  The  ability  of  generated  compounds  to  pass 

multiple stages of standard CADD filtering processes demonstrates the promise of this technique 

in application to challenging targets. However, the lack of in vitro and in vivo experimental data 

for verification and benchmarks for quality assessment pose immediate challenges to a robust 

assessment  of  this  and  other  DL-assisted  generative  models.  Furthermore,  while  the  finalist 

molecules all have favorable synthesizability scores, true synthesizability and stability are difficult 

to assess and many of the generated compounds are somewhat peculiar looking. To improve DL-

assisted  de  novo  design  methods,  representing  compounds  for  DL  models  as  molecular  graph 

convolutions  instead  of  SMILES  strings  has  shown  promise  as  a  superior  mode  of  structural 

representation.103  We  plan  to  transition  future  versions  of  DarkChem  to  graph  convolution 

molecular  representations  to  improve  the  ability  to  generate  increasingly  realistic,  stable 

compounds. 

 

19 

 

Figure 5. Finalist generated structures display a high degree of uniqueness compared to training 
set molecules. Representative finalist compounds, the three leftmost molecules, are juxtaposed 
with the most similar training set therapeutic by L1 distance and the most similar training set active 
by Tanimoto score. 
 
Current State of AI for De Novo Molecular Design 

AI is demonstrating promise as a tool in the drug design and discovery process. However, the 

field is in its infancy and is regularly described with either over-inflated hype about what it can 

deliver or harsh derision and dismissal. As such, many in the field are calling for a more measured 

approach coupled with the development of suitable guidelines for measuring performance of AI 

models to better understand current limitations and possibilities.104 While sensationalist headlines 

would have one believe that we are nearing the point in which AI can effectively generate novel 

drugs with desirable in vivo properties for a target of interest, the reality is that current generative 

models have a considerable way to go before that claim can reasonably be made. In fact, it may 

 

20 

not be possible for a single AI to autonomously design drugs; it could be that the best outcome 

will  arise  from  a suite of  AI models  used  in  concert  at  various stages  of the  drug  design  and 

optimization process. Furthermore, the ideal model(s) might be dependent on the individual target 

rather than being universal.105 There are many suggestions regarding specific intermediate goals 

that the AI drug design community should strive to achieve in an effort to establish standards by 

which  generative  models  can  be  judged.  One  such  suggested  near-term  goal  is  for  generative 

models to demonstrate the effective shrinking of the vast search space used by traditional virtual 

and high-throughput screening methods.106 However, the means by which to demonstrate success 

at such a task is up for debate. A large obstacle facing the AI drug design community is that there 

is no current “best practice” for assessing performance. It is widely agreed that at a minimum, the 

similarity  of  generated molecules  to  training  molecules  should  be  assessed.  Other  suggestions 

include comparing output to that produced by other drug design tools and bioisosteric replacement 

methods, assessment of activity at off-targets, and sensitivity analysis of how data quality and 

quantity affect output. To begin to fill this gap, some nascent benchmarking sets have recently 

been introduced.8, 107 While the authors highlight the inherent difficult in creating objective quality 

metrics and note that many of the benchmarks are too easily solved by most DL-based de novo 

design models, the benchmarks offer a promising initial step in the development of robust quality 

assessment techniques.  

 

CONCLUSION. In summary, we produced a library of NMDAR PCP site antagonists including 

known actives, known inactives, and decoys. We demonstrated the application of this library to 

the  AI-assisted  generation  of  structurally  unique  putative  active  compounds  targeting  a  more 

complex site than previously seen that were then downselected using standard CADD techniques. 

 

21 

We identified current limitations of generative models in de novo design including the absence of 

receptor structural information during the training process and the lack of existing baselines for 

comparison.  While  the ability  of  AI-generated  compounds  to  pass  ligand-  and  structure-based 

filters for a complex target is promising, we advise that rigorous benchmarks are needed for more 

robust assessment of this technology. 

 

METHODS.  

NMDAR Antagonist Library 

The NMDAR PCP site antagonist library was built by extracting from a comprehensive literature 

search for experimental Ki and IC50 values of ligands used in PCP site binding assays.33, 36, 39-71, 73-

88, 108-116 Ligands with Ki values less than 100 µM were placed in the ‘Actives’ section of the 

library, and those 100 µM or greater were placed in the ‘Inactives’ section. The library contains 

728 active and 87 inactive literature-verified compounds, and 297 PCP analogs and near-analogs 

without binding data scraped from the website isomerdesign.com. The html code from the page 

was parsed using the Python library BeautifulSoup117 by visiting every compound stored under the 

tag ‘arylcycloalkylamine’ and extracting the molecular information. A set of thirty-nine actives 

from a single study83 (‘validation1’ in Figure S1) with a wide range of PCP site activities were 

used to seed the generation of decoy molecules using the Database of Useful Decoys: Enhanced 

(DUD-E) database,118 which were added to the library. All library compounds are represented by 

their  canonical  SMILES.  Canonicalization  was  performed  using  OpenBabel  (version  2.4.1, 

2019, http://openbabel.org).119 The complete library can be found in Supporting Information. 

Ligand- and Structure-Based Analysis 

 

22 

Both 1- and 2-D physiocochemical properties were calculated for each of library compounds 

using  ChemAxon’s  cxcalc  (version  5.2.0,  http://www.chemaxon.com).  The  properties  were 

normalized  and  applied  to  the  chemical  property  PCA  space  using  the  Python  library  scikit-

learn,120  in  which  PCA  space  was  defined  following  the  method  outlined  in  the  Colby  et  al. 

DarkChem publication.121 

The library compounds were split into training and test sets (75%/25%) using stratified random 

sampling with ten-fold cross-validation to account for the imbalance between classes. An SVM 

binary classification model for predicting binding affinity was built and trained on the training set 

with scikit-learn, with performance assessed using recall, precision, f1 score, and area under the 

precision-recall curve (AUPR). The properties used in model building are enumerated in Table S1. 

Structure-based analysis was performed using a 3D crystallographic structure of the NMDAR 

(PDB code 5UN1) downloaded from www.rcsb.com.30 The receptor was prepared with Chimera122 

by removing the bound ligand MK-801 after creating a centroid to extract the center coordinates 

of the bound ligand. Next, the Chimera structure editing “dock prep” feature was run with the 

option to consider H-bonds, the AMBER ff14sb option to include charges for standard residues, 

and the AM1-BCC option to include charges for non-standard residues. The resulting NMDAR 

structure was saved for docking in PDB format after removing all hydrogens. Using this structure, 

the active, inactive, and decoy compounds from the library were run through an AutoDock Vina123 

docking simulation using PyRX124, where the previously extracted centroid coordinates were used 

to define the search space in the protein. The top eight pose scores, or the maximum number found 

if below eight, were collected for each compound. 

De Novo Design of Potential Channel Blockers 

 

23 

Putative structures were generated using DarkChem, a SMILES-based VAE implementation 

with  coupled  property  predictor,  with  model  parameters  matching  those  of  Colby  et  al.26  The 

model was initialized with pretrained weights from a transfer learning configuration including 

~55M mass-labeled compounds from PubChem;100 ~700K mass- and computed collision cross 

section (CCS)- labeled compounds from the union of the Universal Natural Product Database,125 

Human Metabolome Database,126 and Distributed Structure-searchable Toxicity127 datasets; and 

~500 mass- and experimental CCS- labeled compounds curated from the literature. This pretrained 

model was used to encode the set of 728 known NMDAR actives into a 128-dimension latent 

vector representation of molecular structure.  The mean and variance of the actives was calculated 

for each dimension and used to define a 128-dimension random normal distribution from which 

100K  latent  vectors  were  sampled.  Each  latent  vector  was  decoded  to  the  k  most  probable 

structures using beamsearch (k=100), resulting in 10M putative structures. These were initially 

downselected by SMILES canonicalization and duplicate removal, checking for SMILES validity 

using rdkit (rdkit.org), and ensuring sampled latent vectors fell within the convex hull defined by 

the 728 known actives, reducing the putative set to 198,826. The convex hull was constructed from 

the first 8 principal components of the latent representation using the Quickhull128 algorithm from 

the spatial module of SciPy.129 

Downselection of Generated Compounds 

The remaining structures were assessed for potential PCP site activity by being tested against 

the classification model. Passing compounds were then run through the same docking simulation 

as the library compounds. The compounds with docking scores in the range of known actives were 

assessed for synthesizability and filtered for desirable ADME properties using SwissADME,130 for 

which  the  known  therapeutic  PCP  site  actives  memantine,  ketamine,  dextromethorphan,  and 

 

24 

amantadine were used as a basis for comparison. A synthetic accessibility score of six or higher 

(on a scale of one to ten) was considered undesirable. Drug- and lead-likeness violations were only 

accepted if any of the known PCP site therapeutics contained the same violation. Predicted activity 

at  any  of  the  set  of  receptors  checked  by  SwissADME  was  also  only  accepted  if  any  known 

therapeutics  demonstrated  the  same  prediction.  Remaining  compounds  were  then  filtered  for 

desirable gastrointestinal absorption, blood-brain barrier permeability, and solubility. The passing 

molecules were further compared against the known therapeutics and filtered to those containing 

at least one hydrogen bond acceptor, no more than six heavy aromatic atoms, at least one nitrogen 

atom, and a consensus logP between two and four. A link to the Jupyter notebook containing the 

filtering script is included in Supporting Information. The twelve finalist compounds were cross-

referenced against a chemical library comprised of a collection of thirty-one chemical databases 

and websites to determine their novelty.125-126, 131-159 Predicted metabolites for each of the twelve 

finalist  compounds  were  generated  using  BioTransformer135  and  are  reported  in  Supporting 

Information. 

Similarity Assessment of AI-Generated Compounds to Known Actives 

Substructure  assessment  was  conducted  utilizing  graph  theory  (i.e.  subgraph  isomorphism) 

where the molecular graph was defined by a set of nodes (i.e. atoms) and a set of connecting edges 

(i.e. bonds). Substructures ranging in size from one atom of a molecule to the entire molecule were 

found in two stages. In the first stage, only the paths consisting of a straight chain of nodes where 

each node is connected to every other in the molecule were found. Breadth-first search was used 

to find every possible path in the molecule by starting with an arbitrary atom in a molecular graph 

and exploring by degree, starting from all first-degree neighbor nodes and then moving to one-

degree deeper nodes until all connecting nodes were visited. In the second stage, paths containing 

 

25 

branches were searched using depth-first search by exploring each node branch to the deepest level 

from the starting node until no more connections were found. As a result, branches were mapped 

to the chain paths at possible positions. Obtained substructures were stored as canonical SMILES. 

The  distance  between  each  finalist  structure  and  active  in  the  128-dimension  space  was 

computed by L1 norm. The Tanimoto similarity between each of the twelve final structures and 

every library active was computed using RDKit. The similarity scores were evaluated to locate the 

nearest active by L1 norm and Tanimoto similarity to each finalist molecule.  

 

ASSOCIATED CONTENT. 

Supporting Information. NMDAR PCP site library, enumerated compounds at each stage of 

screening, additional figures and tables illustrating activity model assessment, PCA, docking 

numerics, and similarity assessment, ADME-based filtering script, QSAR SVM script, and 

predicted metabolites.  

The following files are available free of charge. 

NMDAR PCP Site Library (XLSX) 

Supporting Figures and Tables (PDF) 

Filtering Script (IPYNB) 

QSAR SVM Script (IPYNB) 

Predicted Metabolites of Finalists (XLSX) 

 
AUTHOR INFORMATION 

Corresponding Author 

*Email: ryan.renslow@pnnl.gov 

 

26 

Author Contributions 

The manuscript was written through contributions of all authors. All authors have given approval 

to the final version of the manuscript.  

Notes 

The authors declare no competing financial interests. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

This research was supported by the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory (PNNL) Laboratory 

Directed Research and Development program. PNNL is operated for DOE by Battelle Memorial 

Institute under contract DE-AC05-76RL01830. 

We thank Nathan Baker for his input on protein preparation for molecular docking simulations 

and Madison Blumer for providing BioTransformer assessment. 

ABBREVIATIONS USED 

ADME,  absorption,  distribution,  metabolism  and  excretion;  AI,  artificial  intelligence;  CADD, 

computer-assisted drug discovery; CNS, central nervous system; DL, deep learning; NMDAR, N-

methyl  D-aspartate  receptor;  PCA,  principal  component  analysis;  PCP,  phencyclidine;  QSAR, 

quantitative  structure-activity  relationship;  SMILES,  Simplified  Molecular  Input  Line  Entry 

Specification; SVM, support vector machine; TMD, transmembrane domain; VAE, variational 

autoencoder. 

REFERENCES 

1. 
Ching, T.; Himmelstein Daniel, S.; Beaulieu-Jones Brett, K.; Kalinin Alexandr, A.; Do 
Brian, T.; Way Gregory, P.; Ferrero, E.; Agapow, P.-M.; Zietz, M.; Hoffman Michael, M.; Xie, 
W.; Rosen Gail, L.; Lengerich Benjamin, J.; Israeli, J.; Lanchantin, J.; Woloszynek, S.; 
Carpenter Anne, E.; Shrikumar, A.; Xu, J.; Cofer Evan, M.; Lavender Christopher, A.; Turaga 

 

27 

Doman, T. N.; McGovern, S. L.; Witherbee, B. J.; Kasten, T. P.; Kurumbail, R.; 

Ekins, S.; Puhl, A. C.; Zorn, K. M.; Lane, T. R.; Russo, D. P.; Klein, J. J.; Hickey, A. J.; 

Brown, N.; Fiscato, M.; Segler, M. H. S.; Vaucher, A. C., GuacaMol: Benchmarking 

Segler, M. H. S.; Kogej, T.; Tyrchan, C.; Waller, M. P., Generating Focused Molecule 

Segler, M. H. S.; Preuss, M.; Waller, M. P., Planning chemical syntheses with deep 

Reymond, J.-L.; Awale, M., Exploring Chemical Space for Drug Discovery Using the 

Rifaioglu, A. S.; Atas, H.; Martin, M. J.; Cetin-Atalay, R.; Atalay, V.; Doğan, T., Recent 

Bohacek, R. S.; McMartin, C.; Guida, W. C., The art and practice of structure-based drug 

Srinivas, C.; Alexandari Amr, M.; Lu, Z.; Harris David, J.; DeCaprio, D.; Qi, Y.; Kundaje, A.; 
Peng, Y.; Wiley Laura, K.; Segler Marwin, H. S.; Boca Simina, M.; Swamidass, S. J.; Huang, A.; 
Gitter, A.; Greene Casey, S., Opportunities and obstacles for deep learning in biology and 
medicine. Journal of The Royal Society Interface 2018, 15 (141), 20170387. 
2. 
neural networks and symbolic AI. Nature 2018, 555 (7698), 604-610. 
3. 
Chemical Universe Database. ACS Chemical Neuroscience 2012, 3 (9), 649-657. 
4. 
design: A molecular modeling perspective. Medicinal Research Reviews 1996, 16 (1), 3-50. 
5. 
Stallings, W. C.; Connolly, D. T.; Shoichet, B. K., Molecular Docking and High-Throughput 
Screening for Novel Inhibitors of Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase-1B. Journal of Medicinal 
Chemistry 2002, 45 (11), 2213-2221. 
6. 
Clark, A. M., Exploiting machine learning for end-to-end drug discovery and development. 
Nature Materials 2019, 18 (5), 435-441. 
7. 
applications of deep learning and machine intelligence on in silico drug discovery: methods, 
tools and databases. Briefings in Bioinformatics 2018. 
8. 
Models for de Novo Molecular Design. Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling 2019, 59 
(3), 1096-1108. 
9. 
Libraries for Drug Discovery with Recurrent Neural Networks. ACS Central Science 2018, 4 (1), 
120-131. 
10.  Miyao, T.; Kaneko, H.; Funatsu, K., Inverse QSPR/QSAR Analysis for Chemical 
Structure Generation (from y to x). Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling 2016, 56 (2), 
286-299. 
11.  Wong, W. W. L.; Burkowski, F. J., A constructive approach for discovering new drug 
leads: Using a kernel methodology for the inverse-QSAR problem. Journal of Cheminformatics 
2009, 1 (1), 4. 
Churchwell, C. J.; Rintoul, M. D.; Martin, S.; Visco, D. P.; Kotu, A.; Larson, R. S.; 
12. 
Sillerud, L. O.; Brown, D. C.; Faulon, J.-L., The signature molecular descriptor. 3. Inverse-
quantitative structure-activity relationship of ICAM-1 inhibitory peptides. J Mol Graph Model 
2004, 22 (4), 263-273. 
13. 
A., Objective-reinforced generative adversarial networks (ORGAN) for sequence generation 
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.10843 2017. 
14. 
Lengeling, B.; Sheberla, D.; Aguilera-Iparraguirre, J.; Hirzel, T. D.; Adams, R. P.; Aspuru-
Guzik, A., Automatic Chemical Design Using a Data-Driven Continuous Representation of 
Molecules. ACS Central Science 2018, 4 (2), 268-276. 
15. 
Translating from Reduced Graphs to SMILES. Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling 
2019, 59 (3), 1136-1146. 

Guimaraes, G. L.; Sanchez-Lengeling, B.; Outeiral, C.; Farias, P. L. C.; Aspuru-Guzik, 

Gómez-Bombarelli, R.; Wei, J. N.; Duvenaud, D.; Hernández-Lobato, J. M.; Sánchez-

Pogány, P.; Arad, N.; Genway, S.; Pickett, S. D., De Novo Molecule Design by 

 

28 

Kadurin, A.; Nikolenko, S.; Khrabrov, K.; Aliper, A.; Zhavoronkov, A., druGAN: An 

Chen, H.; Engkvist, O.; Wang, Y.; Olivecrona, M.; Blaschke, T., The rise of deep 

Kingma, D. P.; Welling, M., Auto-encoding variational bayes. arXiv preprint 

Blaschke, T.; Olivecrona, M.; Engkvist, O.; Bajorath, J.; Chen, H., Application of 

Lim, J.; Ryu, S.; Kim, J. W.; Kim, W. Y., Molecular generative model based on 

Polykovskiy, D.; Zhebrak, A.; Vetrov, D.; Ivanenkov, Y.; Aladinskiy, V.; Mamoshina, 

Ståhl, N.; Falkman, G.; Karlsson, A.; Mathiason, G.; Boström, J., Deep Reinforcement 

Putin, E.; Asadulaev, A.; Vanhaelen, Q.; Ivanenkov, Y.; Aladinskaya, A. V.; Aliper, A.; 

16. 
Zhavoronkov, A., Adversarial Threshold Neural Computer for Molecular de Novo Design. 
Molecular Pharmaceutics 2018, 15 (10), 4386-4397. 
17. 
Advanced Generative Adversarial Autoencoder Model for de Novo Generation of New 
Molecules with Desired Molecular Properties in Silico. Molecular Pharmaceutics 2017, 14 (9), 
3098-3104. 
18. 
P.; Bozdaganyan, M.; Aliper, A.; Zhavoronkov, A.; Kadurin, A., Entangled Conditional 
Adversarial Autoencoder for de Novo Drug Discovery. Molecular Pharmaceutics 2018, 15 (10), 
4398-4405. 
19. 
Sattarov, B.; Baskin, I. I.; Horvath, D.; Marcou, G.; Bjerrum, E. J.; Varnek, A., De Novo 
Molecular Design by Combining Deep Autoencoder Recurrent Neural Networks with Generative 
Topographic Mapping. Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling 2019, 59 (3), 1182-1196. 
20. 
Learning for Multiparameter Optimization in de novo Drug Design. Journal of Chemical 
Information and Modeling 2019, 59 (7), 3166-3176. 
21. 
learning in drug discovery. Drug Discovery Today 2018, 23 (6), 1241-1250. 
22. 
arXiv:1312.6114 2013. 
23. 
Generative Autoencoder in De Novo Molecular Design. Molecular Informatics 2018, 37 (1-2), 
1700123. 
24. 
conditional variational autoencoder for de novo molecular design. Journal of Cheminformatics 
2018, 10 (1), 31. 
25. 
Aladinskaya, A. V.; Terentiev, V. A.; Polykovskiy, D. A.; Kuznetsov, M. D.; Asadulaev, A.; 
Volkov, Y.; Zholus, A.; Shayakhmetov, R. R.; Zhebrak, A.; Minaeva, L. I.; Zagribelnyy, B. A.; 
Lee, L. H.; Soll, R.; Madge, D.; Xing, L.; Guo, T.; Aspuru-Guzik, A., Deep learning enables 
rapid identification of potent DDR1 kinase inhibitors. Nature Biotechnology 2019, 37 (9), 1038-
1040. 
26. 
to generate in silico chemical property libraries and candidate molecules for small molecule 
identification in complex samples. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.08411 2019. 
Kadriu, B.; Gold, P. W.; Luckenbaugh, D. A.; Lener, M. S.; Ballard, E. D.; Niciu, M. J.; 
27. 
Henter, I. D.; Park, L. T.; De Sousa, R. T.; Yuan, P.; Machado-Vieira, R.; Zarate, C. A., Acute 
ketamine administration corrects abnormal inflammatory bone markers in major depressive 
disorder. Molecular Psychiatry 2018, 23 (7), 1626-1631. 
28. 
Default Mode Connectivity in Major Depressive Disorder Measured Up to 10 Days After 
Ketamine Administration. Biological Psychiatry 2018, 84 (8), 582-590. 
29. 
Zarate, C. A., Ketamine has distinct electrophysiological and behavioral effects in depressed and 
healthy subjects. Molecular Psychiatry 2019, 24 (7), 1040-1052. 

Colby, S. M.; Nuñez, J. R.; Hodas, N. O.; Corley, C. D.; Renslow, R. R., Deep learning 

Zhavoronkov, A.; Ivanenkov, Y. A.; Aliper, A.; Veselov, M. S.; Aladinskiy, V. A.; 

Evans, J. W.; Szczepanik, J.; Brutsché, N.; Park, L. T.; Nugent, A. C.; Zarate, C. A., 

Nugent, A. C.; Ballard, E. D.; Gould, T. D.; Park, L. T.; Moaddel, R.; Brutsche, N. E.; 

 

29 

Popova, M.; Isayev, O.; Tropsha, A., Deep reinforcement learning for de novo drug 

Zanos, P.; Moaddel, R.; Morris, P. J.; Riggs, L. M.; Highland, J. N.; Georgiou, P.; 

Li, Y.; Zhang, L.; Liu, Z., Multi-objective de novo drug design with conditional graph 

Vinicius Santana, M.; Castro, H.; Abreu, P., NMDA Receptor as a Molecular Target for 

30. 
Song, X.; Jensen, M. Ø.; Jogini, V.; Stein, R. A.; Lee, C.-H.; McHaourab, H. S.; Shaw, 
D. E.; Gouaux, E., Mechanism of NMDA receptor channel block by MK-801 and memantine. 
Nature 2018, 556 (7702), 515-519. 
31. 
design. Science Advances 2018, 4 (7), eaap7885. 
32. 
generative model. Journal of Cheminformatics 2018, 10 (1), 33. 
Zanos, P.; Moaddel, R.; Morris, P. J.; Georgiou, P.; Fischell, J.; Elmer, G. I.; Alkondon, 
33. 
M.; Yuan, P.; Pribut, H. J.; Singh, N. S., NMDAR inhibition-independent antidepressant actions 
of ketamine metabolites. Nature 2016, 533 (7604), 481. 
34. 
Pereira, E. F. R.; Albuquerque, E. X.; Thomas, C. J.; Zarate, C. A., Jr.; Gould, T. D., Ketamine 
and Ketamine Metabolite Pharmacology: Insights into Therapeutic Mechanisms. Pharmacol Rev 
2018, 70 (3), 621-660. 
35. 
Central Nervous System Disorders: The Advances and Contributions of Molecular Modeling. 
2017; pp 211-249. 
36.  Wallach, J.; Brandt, S. D., Phencyclidine-Based New Psychoactive Substances. In New 
Psychoactive Substances : Pharmacology, Clinical, Forensic and Analytical Toxicology, Maurer, 
H. H.; Brandt, S. D., Eds. Springer International Publishing: Cham, 2018; pp 261-303. 
37.  Wang, J. X.; Furukawa, H., Dissecting diverse functions of NMDA receptors by 
structural biology. Current Opinion in Structural Biology 2019, 54, 34-42. 
38. 
Brain Exposure. Journal of Medicinal Chemistry 2015, 58 (6), 2584-2608. 
39. 
NMDA receptor antagonists derived from dexoxadrol and etoxadrol. Bioorganic & Medicinal 
Chemistry 2005, 13 (24), 6836-6849. 
40. 
Barygin, O. I.; Gmiro, V. E.; Kim, K. K.; Magazanik, L. G.; Tikhonov, D. B., Blockade 
of NMDA receptor channels by 9-aminoacridine and its derivatives. Neuroscience Letters 2009, 
451 (1), 29-33. 
41. 
modulatory site of the NMDA receptor: 50-fold increase in potency by insertion of an aromatic 
ring into an alkanediamine chain. European Journal of Medicinal Chemistry 1998, 33 (1), 3-14. 
42. 
affinities of 1,2-diphenylethylamine and 1-(1,2-diphenylethyl)piperidine enantiomers and of 
related compounds. Bioorganic & Medicinal Chemistry 2009, 17 (9), 3456-3462. 
43. 
Kaźmierczak, P.; Rezler, M.; Jarak, I.; Piantanida, I.; Karminski-Zamola, G.; Mayence, A.; 
Rebernik, P.; Kumar, A.; Ismail, M. A.; Boykin, D. W.; Huang, T. L., Pentamidine analogs as 
inhibitors of [(3)H]MK-801 and [(3)H]ifenprodil binding to rat brain NMDA receptors. 
Bioorganic & medicinal chemistry 2015, 23 (15), 4489-4500. 
44. 
Retz, D. M.; Ortwine, D. F.; Probert Jr, A. W., Synthesis and pharmacological evaluation of 4a-
phenanthrenamine derivatives acting at the phencyclidine binding site of the N-methyl-D-
aspartate receptor complex. Journal of medicinal chemistry 1993, 36 (14), 1977-1995. 

Rankovic, Z., CNS Drug Design: Balancing Physicochemical Properties for Optimal 

Aepkers, M.; Wünsch, B., Structure–affinity relationship studies of non-competitive 

Bigge, C. F.; Malone, T. C.; Hays, S. J.; Johnson, G.; Novak, P. M.; Lescosky, L. J.; 

Berger, M. L.; Schödl, C.; Noe, C. R., Inverse agonists at the polyamine-sensitive 

Berger, M. L.; Schweifer, A.; Rebernik, P.; Hammerschmidt, F., NMDA receptor 

Berger, M. L.; Maciejewska, D.; Vanden Eynde, J. J.; Mottamal, M.; Żabiński, J.; 

 

30 

Chaudieu, I.; Vignon, J.; Chicheportiche, M.; Kamenka, J.-M.; Trouiller, G.; 

Gee, K. R.; Barmettler, P.; Rhodes, M. R.; McBurney, R. N.; Reddy, N. L.; Hu, L. Y.; 

Gilling, K.; Jatzke, C.; Wollenburg, C.; Vanejevs, M.; Kauss, V.; Jirgensons, A.; Parsons, 

Domino, E. F.; Kamenka, J. M.; Centre national de la recherche, s., Sigma and 

Dravid, S. M.; Erreger, K.; Yuan, H.; Nicholson, K.; Le, P.; Lyuboslavsky, P.; Almonte, 

Ebert, B.; Thorkildsen, C.; Andersen, S.; Christrup, L. L.; Hjeds, H., Opioid analgesics as 

45. 
Chicheportiche, R., Role of the aromatic group in the inhibition of phencyclidine binding and 
dopamine uptake by PCP analogs. Pharmacology Biochemistry and Behavior 1989, 32 (3), 699-
705. 
46. 
Colestock, T.; Wallach, J.; Mansi, M.; Filemban, N.; Morris, H.; Elliott, S. P.; Westphal, 
F.; Brandt, S. D.; Adejare, A., Syntheses, analytical and pharmacological characterizations of the 
‘legal high’ 4-[1-(3-methoxyphenyl)cyclohexyl]morpholine (3-MeO-PCMo) and analogues. 
Drug Testing and Analysis 2018, 10 (2), 272-283. 
47. 
Phencyclidine-like Compounds as Molecular Probes in Biology. NPP Books: 1988. 
48. 
A.; Murray, E.; Mosley, C.; Barber, J.; French, A.; Balster, R.; Murray, T. F.; Traynelis, S. F., 
Subunit-specific mechanisms and proton sensitivity of NMDA receptor channel block. The 
Journal of Physiology 2007, 581 (1), 107-128. 
49. 
noncompetitive N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) antagonists. Biochemical Pharmacology 1998, 
56 (5), 553-559. 
50. 
Elhallaoui, M.; Elasri, M.; Ouazzani, F.; Mechaqrane, A.; Lakhlifi, T., Quantitative 
Structure-Activity Relationships of Noncompetitive Antagonists of the NMDA Receptor: A 
Study of a Series of MK801 Derivative Molecules Using Statistical Methods and Neural 
Network. International Journal of Molecular Sciences 2003, 4. 
51. 
Cotter, R. E.; Hamilton, P. N.; Weber, E.; Keana, J. F. W., 10, 5-(Iminomethano)-10, 11-
dihydro-5H-dibenzo [a, d] cycloheptene and derivatives. Potent PCP receptor ligands. Journal of 
medicinal chemistry 1993, 36 (14), 1938-1946. 
52. 
E.; Weber, E.; Keana, J. F. W., Arene Chromium and Manganese Tricarbonyl Analogs of the 
PCP Receptor Ligands 5-Methyl-10,11-dihydro-5H-dibenzo[a,d]cyclohepten-5,10-imine (MK-
801) and 10,5-(Iminomethano)-10,11-dihydro-5H-dibenzo[a,d]cycloheptene (IDDC). The 
Journal of Organic Chemistry 1994, 59 (6), 1492-1498. 
53. 
C. G., A novel class of amino-alkylcyclohexanes as uncompetitive, fast, voltage-dependent, N-
methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonists – in vitro characterization. Journal of Neural 
Transmission 2007, 114 (12), 1529-1537. 
54. 
Gordon, R. K.; Nigam, S. V.; Weitz, J. A.; Dave, J. R.; Doctor, B. P.; Ved, H. S., The 
NMDA receptor ion channel: a site for binding of huperzine A. Journal of Applied Toxicology 
2001, 21 (S1), S47-S51. 
55. 
Gray, N. M.; Cheng, B. K.; Mick, S. J.; Lair, C. M.; Contreras, P. C., Phencyclidine-like 
effects of tetrahydroisoquinolines and related compounds. Journal of Medicinal Chemistry 1989, 
32 (6), 1242-1248. 
56. 
Hays, S. J.; Novak, P. M.; Ortwine, D. F.; Bigge, C. F.; Colbry, N. L.; Johnson, G.; 
Lescosky, L. J.; Malone, T. C.; Michael, A., Synthesis and pharmacological evaluation of 
hexahydrofluorenamines as noncompetitive antagonists at the N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor. 
Journal of Medicinal Chemistry 1993, 36 (6), 654-670. 
57. 
Synthesis and Pharmacological Evaluation of N-(2,5-Disubstituted phenyl)-N‘-(3-substituted 

Gee, K. R.; Lu, Y.; Barmettler, P.; Rhodes, M. R.; Reddy, N. L.; Fischer, J. B.; Cotter, R. 

Hu, L.-Y.; Guo, J.; Magar, S. S.; Fischer, J. B.; Burke-Howie, K. J.; Durant, G. J., 

 

31 

Itzhak, Y.; Kalir, A.; Weissman, B. A.; Cohen, S., New analgesic drugs derived from 

Kang, H.; Park, P.; Bortolotto, Z. A.; Brandt, S. D.; Colestock, T.; Wallach, J.; 

Kozlowski, M. R.; Browne, R. G.; Vinick, F. J., Discriminative stimulus properties of 

Linders, J. T. M.; Monn, J. A.; Mattson, M. V.; George, C.; Jacobson, A. E.; Rice, K. C., 

phenyl)-N‘-methylguanidines As N-Methyl-d-aspartate Receptor Ion-Channel Blockers. Journal 
of Medicinal Chemistry 1997, 40 (26), 4281-4289. 
58. 
phencyclidine. Journal of Medicinal Chemistry 1981, 24 (5), 496-499. 
59. 
Collingridge, G. L.; Lodge, D., Ephenidine: A new psychoactive agent with ketamine-like 
NMDA receptor antagonist properties. Neuropharmacology 2017, 112 (Pt A), 144-149. 
Kozikowski, A. P.; Pang, Y. P., Structural determinants of affinity for the phencyclidine 
60. 
binding site of the N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor complex: discovery of a rigid phencyclidine 
analogue of high binding affinity. Molecular Pharmacology 1990, 37 (3), 352. 
61. 
phencyclidine (PCP)-related compounds: Correlations with 3H-PCP binding potency measured 
autoradiographically. Pharmacology Biochemistry and Behavior 1986, 25 (5), 1051-1058. 
62. 
Largent, B. L.; Gundlach, A. L.; Snyder, S. H., Pharmacological and autoradiographic 
discrimination of sigma and phencyclidine receptor binding sites in brain with (+)-[3H]SKF 
10,047, (+)-[3H]-3-[3-hydroxyphenyl]-N-(1-propyl)piperidine and [3H]-1-[1-(2-
thienyl)cyclohexyl]piperidine. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics 1986, 
238 (2), 739. 
63. 
Synthesis and binding properties of MK-801 isothiocyanates; (+)-3-isothiocyanato-5-methyl-
10,11-dihydro-5H-dibenzo[a,d]cyclohepten-5,10-imine hydrochloride: a new, potent and 
selective electrophilic affinity ligand for the NMDA receptor-coupled phencyclidine binding site. 
Journal of Medicinal Chemistry 1993, 36 (17), 2499-2507. 
64.  Mendelsohn, L. G.; Kerchner, G. A.; Kalra, V.; Zimmerman, D. M.; Leander, J. D., 
Phencyclidine receptors in rat brain cortex. Biochemical Pharmacology 1984, 33 (22), 3529-
3535. 
65.  Monn, J. A.; Thurkauf, A.; Mattson, M. V.; Jacobson, A. E.; Rice, K. C., Synthesis and 
structure-activity relationship of C5-substituted analogs of (.+-.)-10, 11-dihydro-5H-dibenzo [a, 
d] cyclohepten-5, 10-imine [(.+-.)-desmethyl-MK801]: ligands for the NMDA receptor-coupled 
phencyclidine binding site. Journal of medicinal chemistry 1990, 33 (3), 1069-1076. 
66. 
Naumiec, G. R.; Jenko, K. J.; Zoghbi, S. S.; Innis, R. B.; Cai, L.; Pike, V. W., N′-3-
(Trifluoromethyl)phenyl Derivatives of N-Aryl-N′-methylguanidines as Prospective PET 
Radioligands for the Open Channel of the N-Methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) Receptor: Synthesis 
and Structure–Affinity Relationships. Journal of Medicinal Chemistry 2015, 58 (24), 9722-9730. 
67. 
stimulus effects of novel NMDA channel blockers in rats. Psychopharmacology 2003, 170 (2), 
215-224. 
68. 
phencyclidine site of NMDA receptors in the rat brain. European Journal of Pharmacology 
1996, 310 (2), 273-276. 
69. 
Parsons, C. G.; Quack, G.; Bresink, I.; Baran, L.; Przegalinski, E.; Kostowski, W.; 
Krzascik, P.; Hartmann, S.; Danysz, W., Comparison of the potency, kinetics and voltage-
dependency of a series of uncompetitive NMDA receptor antagonists in vitro with anticonvulsive 
and motor impairment activity in vivo. Neuropharmacology 1995, 34 (10), 1239-1258. 
70. 
M.; Eilbacher, B.; Quack, G., Amino-alkyl-cyclohexanes are novel uncompetitive NMDA 

Olmos, G.; Ribera, J.; García-Sevilla, J. A., Imidazoli(di)ne compounds interact with the 

Parsons, C. G.; Danysz, W.; Bartmann, A.; Spielmanns, P.; Frankiewicz, T.; Hesselink, 

Nicholson, K. L.; Balster, R. L., Evaluation of the phencyclidine-like discriminative 

 

32 

Sałat, K.; Siwek, A.; Starowicz, G.; Librowski, T.; Nowak, G.; Drabik, U.; Gajdosz, R.; 

receptor antagonists with strong voltage-dependency and fast blocking kinetics: in vitro and in 
vivo characterization. Neuropharmacology 1999, 38 (1), 85-108. 
71. 
Rammes, G.; Rupprecht, R.; Ferrari, U.; Zieglgänsberger, W.; Parsons, C. G., The N-
methyl-d-aspartate receptor channel blockers memantine, MRZ 2/579 and other amino-alkyl-
cyclohexanes antagonise 5-HT3 receptor currents in cultured HEK-293 and N1E-115 cell 
systems in a non-competitive manner. Neuroscience Letters 2001, 306 (1), 81-84. 
72. 
Rogawski, M. A.; Yamaguchi, S.; Jones, S. M.; Rice, K. C.; Thurkauf, A.; Monn, J. A., 
Anticonvulsant activity of the low-affinity uncompetitive N-methyl-D- aspartate antagonist (+-)-
5-aminocarbonyl-10,11-dihydro-5H- dibenzo[a,d]cyclohepten-5,10-imine (ADCI): comparison 
with the structural analogs dizocilpine (MK-801) and carbamazepine. Journal of Pharmacology 
and Experimental Therapeutics 1991, 259 (1), 30. 
73. 
Roth, B. L.; Gibbons, S.; Arunotayanun, W.; Huang, X.-P.; Setola, V.; Treble, R.; 
Iversen, L., The Ketamine Analogue Methoxetamine and 3- and 4-Methoxy Analogues of 
Phencyclidine Are High Affinity and Selective Ligands for the Glutamate NMDA Receptor. 
PLOS ONE 2013, 8 (3), e59334. 
74. 
Popik, P., Antidepressant-like effects of ketamine, norketamine and dehydronorketamine in 
forced swim test: Role of activity at NMDA receptor. Neuropharmacology 2015, 99, 301-307. 
75. 
Sax, M.; Wunsch, B., Relationships Between the Structure of Dexoxadrol and Etoxadrol 
Analogues and their NMDA Receptor Affinity. Current Topics in Medicinal Chemistry 2006, 6 
(7), 723-732. 
76. 
Sax, M.; Fröhlich, R.; Schepmann, D.; Wünsch, B., Synthesis and NMDA Receptor 
Affinity of Ring and Side Chain Homologues of Dexoxadrol. European Journal of Organic 
Chemistry 2008, 2008 (35), 6015-6028. 
77. 
some phencyclidine analogues by rat tissue and its pharmacological implications. Xenobiotica 
1990, 20 (6), 591-600. 
78. 
receptor by remacemide and its des-glycine metabolite. Journal of Pharmacology and 
Experimental Therapeutics 1996, 276 (1), 161. 
79. 
Thompson, W. J.; Anderson, P. S.; Britcher, S. F.; Lyle, T. A.; Thies, J. E.; Magill, C. A.; 
Varga, S. L.; Schwering, J. E.; Lyle, P. A., Synthesis and pharmacological evaluation of a series 
of dibenzo[a,d]cycloalkenimines as N-methyl-D-aspartate antagonists. Journal of Medicinal 
Chemistry 1990, 33 (2), 789-808. 
80. 
Mattson Mv Fau - Jacobson, A. E.; Jacobson Ae Fau - Rice, K. C.; Rice Kc Fau - Rogawski, M. 
A.; Rogawski, M. A., Synthesis and anticonvulsant activity of 1-phenylcyclohexylamine 
analogues. 1990,  (0022-2623 (Print)). 
81. 
Channel of NMDA Receptor: Qualitative and Quantitative Modeling of the Blocker Binding. 
Doklady Biochemistry and Biophysics 2004, 396 (1), 181-186. 
82.  Wallach, J.; Brandt, S. D., 1,2-Diarylethylamine- and Ketamine-Based New Psychoactive 
Substances. In New Psychoactive Substances : Pharmacology, Clinical, Forensic and Analytical 
Toxicology, Maurer, H. H.; Brandt, S. D., Eds. Springer International Publishing: Cham, 2018; 
pp 305-352. 

Stefek, M.; Ransom, R. W.; Distefano, E. W.; Cho, A. K., The alpha carbon oxidation of 

Subramaniam, S.; Donevan, S. D.; Rogawski, M. A., Block of the N-methyl-D-aspartate 

Thurkauf, A.; de Costa B Fau - Yamaguchi, S.; Yamaguchi S Fau - Mattson, M. V.; 

Tikhonova, I. G.; Baskin, I. I.; Palyulin, V. A.; Zefirov, N. S., 3D-Model of the Ion 

 

33 

Zukin, S. R.; Zukin, R. S., Specific [3H]phencyclidine binding in rat central nervous 

Lipinski, C. A., Lead- and drug-like compounds: the rule-of-five revolution. Drug 

Zarantonello, P.; Bettini, E.; Paio, A.; Simoncelli, C.; Terreni, S.; Cardullo, F., Novel 

83.  Wallach, J. In Structure activity relationship (SAR) studies of arylcycloalkylamines as N-
methyl-D-aspartate receptor antagonists, 2014. 
84.  Wallach, J.; Paoli, G. D.; Adejare, A.; Brandt, S. D., Preparation and analytical 
characterization of 1-(1-phenylcyclohexyl)piperidine (PCP) and 1-(1-
phenylcyclohexyl)pyrrolidine (PCPy) analogues. Drug Testing and Analysis 2014, 6 (7-8), 633-
650. 
85.  Wallach, J.; Kang, H.; Colestock, T.; Morris, H.; Bortolotto, Z. A.; Collingridge, G. L.; 
Lodge, D.; Halberstadt, A. L.; Brandt, S. D.; Adejare, A., Pharmacological Investigations of the 
Dissociative ‘Legal Highs’ Diphenidine, Methoxphenidine and Analogues. PLOS ONE 2016, 11 
(6), e0157021. 
86.  Werling, L. L.; Keller, A.; Frank, J. G.; Nuwayhid, S. J., A comparison of the binding 
profiles of dextromethorphan, memantine, fluoxetine and amitriptyline: Treatment of involuntary 
emotional expression disorder. Experimental Neurology 2007, 207 (2), 248-257. 
87. 
analogues of ketamine and phencyclidine as NMDA receptor antagonists. Bioorganic & 
Medicinal Chemistry Letters 2011, 21 (7), 2059-2063. 
88. 
system. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 1979, 
76 (0027-8424 (Print)), 5372-5376. 
89. 
Aggarwal, C. C.; Hinneburg, A.; Keim, D. A. In On the Surprising Behavior of Distance 
Metrics in High Dimensional Space, Database Theory — ICDT 2001, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2001//; 
Van den Bussche, J.; Vianu, V., Eds. Springer Berlin Heidelberg: Berlin, Heidelberg, 2001; pp 
420-434. 
90. 
Discovery Today: Technologies 2004, 1 (4), 337-341. 
91.  Walters, W. P.; Murcko, M. A., Prediction of ‘drug-likeness’. Advanced Drug Delivery 
Reviews 2002, 54 (3), 255-271. 
92. 
Nettles, J. H.; Jenkins, J. L.; Bender, A.; Deng, Z.; Davies, J. W.; Glick, M., Bridging 
Chemical and Biological Space:  “Target Fishing” Using 2D and 3D Molecular Descriptors. 
Journal of Medicinal Chemistry 2006, 49 (23), 6802-6810. 
93. 
and drug discovery. Drug Discovery Today 2018, 23 (8), 1538-1546. 
94. 
like” and “Nondrug-like” Molecules? Journal of Medicinal Chemistry 1998, 41 (18), 3314-3324. 
95. 
Ethyl 2-[(3-Methyl-2,5-dioxo(3-pyrrolinyl))amino]-4-(trifluoromethyl) pyrimidine-5-
carboxylate:  An Inhibitor of AP-1 and NF-κB Mediated Gene Expression Based on Support 
Vector Machines. Journal of Chemical Information and Computer Sciences 2003, 43 (4), 1288-
1296. 
96.  Miyao, T.; Funatsu, K.; Bajorath, J., Exploring Alternative Strategies for the 
Identification of Potent Compounds Using Support Vector Machine and Regression Modeling. 
Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling 2019, 59 (3), 983-992. 
97. 
Chemistry. In Annual Reports in Computational Chemistry, Spellmeyer, D. C., Ed. Elsevier: 
2006; Vol. 2, pp 127-140. 

Lo, Y.-C.; Rensi, S. E.; Torng, W.; Altman, R. B., Machine learning in chemoinformatics 

Ajay; Walters, W. P.; Murcko, M. A., Can We Learn To Distinguish between “Drug-

Liu, H. X.; Zhang, R. S.; Yao, X. J.; Liu, M. C.; Hu, Z. D.; Fan, B. T., QSAR Study of 

Goldman, B. B.; Walters, W. P., Chapter 8 Machine Learning in Computational 

 

34 

Kenny, P. W., Computation, experiment and molecular design. Journal of Computer-

Lü, W.; Du, J.; Goehring, A.; Gouaux, E., Cryo-EM structures of the triheteromeric 

Issa, N. T.; Wathieu, H.; Ojo, A.; Byers, S. W.; Dakshanamurthy, S., Drug Metabolism in 

98. 
Aided Molecular Design 2012, 26 (1), 69-72. 
99. 
NMDA receptor and its allosteric modulation. Science 2017, 355 (6331), eaal3729. 
100.  Kim, S.; Thiessen, P. A.; Bolton, E. E.; Chen, J.; Fu, G.; Gindulyte, A.; Han, L.; He, J.; 
He, S.; Shoemaker, B. A.; Wang, J.; Yu, B.; Zhang, J.; Bryant, S. H., PubChem Substance and 
Compound databases. Nucleic Acids Res 2016, 44 (D1), D1202-D1213. 
101.  Ramsundar, B.; Kearnes, S.; Riley, P.; Webster, D.; Konerding, D.; Pande, V., Massively 
multitask networks for drug discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:1502.02072 2015. 
102. 
Preclinical Drug Development: A Survey of the Discovery Process, Toxicology, and 
Computational Tools. Curr Drug Metab 2017, 18 (6), 556-565. 
103.  Kearnes, S.; McCloskey, K.; Berndl, M.; Pande, V.; Riley, P., Molecular graph 
convolutions: moving beyond fingerprints. Journal of Computer-Aided Molecular Design 2016, 
30 (8), 595-608. 
104.  Schneider, P.; Walters, W. P.; Plowright, A. T.; Sieroka, N.; Listgarten, J.; Goodnow, R. 
A.; Fisher, J.; Jansen, J. M.; Duca, J. S.; Rush, T. S.; Zentgraf, M.; Hill, J. E.; Krutoholow, E.; 
Kohler, M.; Blaney, J.; Funatsu, K.; Luebkemann, C.; Schneider, G., Rethinking drug design in 
the artificial intelligence era. Nature Reviews Drug Discovery 2019. 
105.  Sellwood, M. A.; Ahmed, M.; Segler, M. H. S.; Brown, N., Artificial intelligence in drug 
discovery. Future Medicinal Chemistry 2018, 10 (17), 2025-2028. 
106.  Smith, J. S.; Roitberg, A. E.; Isayev, O., Transforming Computational Drug Discovery 
with Machine Learning and AI. ACS Medicinal Chemistry Letters 2018, 9 (11), 1065-1069. 
107.  Polykovskiy, D.; Zhebrak, A.; Sanchez-Lengeling, B.; Golovanov, S.; Tatanov, O.; 
Belyaev, S.; Kurbanov, R.; Artamonov, A.; Aladinskiy, V.; Veselov, M., Molecular sets 
(MOSES): a benchmarking platform for molecular generation models. arXiv preprint 
arXiv:1811.12823 2018. 
108.  Albuquerque, E.; Aguayo, L.; E Warnick, J.; Weinstein, H.; D Glick, S.; Maayani, S.; K 
Ickowicz, R.; P Blaustein, M., The behavioral effects of phencyclidine may be due to their 
blockade of potassium channels. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America 1982, 78, 7792-6. 
109.  Dilmore, J. G.; Johnson, J. W., Open channel block and alteration of N-methyl-D-aspartic 
acid receptor gating by an analog of phencyclidine. Biophys J 1998, 75 (4), 1801-1816. 
110.  Elhallaoui, M.; Laguerre, M.; Carpy, A.; Ouazzani, F. C., Molecular modeling of 
noncompetitive antagonists of the NMDA receptor: proposal of a pharmacophore and a 
description of the interaction mode. Molecular modeling annual 2002, 8 (2), 65-72. 
111. 
and Preliminary Biochemical Evaluation of Novel Derivatives of PCP. Letters in Drug Design & 
Discovery 2010, 7 (2), 79-87. 
112.  Lockhart, B. P.; Soulard, P.; Benicourt, C.; Privat, A.; Junien, J.-L., Distinct 
neuroprotective profiles for σ ligands against N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA), and hypoxia-
mediated neurotoxicity in neuronal culture toxicity studies. Brain Research 1995, 675 (1), 110-
120. 
113.  Lodge, D.; Mercier, M. S., Ketamine and phencyclidine: the good, the bad and the 
unexpected. British Journal of Pharmacology 2015, 172 (17), 4254-4276. 

Joannes, T. M. L.; David, C. F.; Mariena, V. M.; Arthur, E. J.; Kenner, C. R., Synthesis 

 

35 

114.  Poulsen, M. H.; Andersen, J.; Christensen, R.; Hansen, K. B.; Traynelis, S. F.; 
Strømgaard, K.; Kristensen, A. S., Binding of ArgTX-636 in the NMDA receptor ion channel. J 
Mol Biol 2015, 427 (1), 176-189. 
115.  Zarate, C. A.; Mathews, D.; Ibrahim, L.; Chaves, J. F.; Marquardt, C.; Ukoh, I.; 
Jolkovsky, L.; Brutsche, N. E.; Smith, M. A.; Luckenbaugh, D. A., A Randomized Trial of a 
Low-Trapping Nonselective N-Methyl-D-Aspartate Channel Blocker in Major Depression. 
Biological Psychiatry 2013, 74 (4), 257-264. 
116.  Manallack, D. T.; Wong, M. G.; Costa, M.; Andrews, P. R.; Beart, P. M., Receptor site 
topographies for phencyclidine-like and sigma drugs: predictions from quantitative 
conformational, electrostatic potential, and radioreceptor analyses. Molecular Pharmacology 
1988, 34 (6), 863. 
117.  Richardson, L. Beautiful soup documentation, 2007. 
118.  Mysinger, M. M.; Carchia, M.; Irwin, J. J.; Shoichet, B. K., Directory of Useful Decoys, 
Enhanced (DUD-E): Better Ligands and Decoys for Better Benchmarking. Journal of Medicinal 
Chemistry 2012, 55 (14), 6582-6594. 
119.  O'Boyle, N. M.; Banck, M.; James, C. A.; Morley, C.; Vandermeersch, T.; Hutchison, G. 
R., Open Babel: An open chemical toolbox. Journal of Cheminformatics 2011, 3 (1), 33. 
120.  Pedregosa, F.; Varoquaux, G.; Gramfort, A.; Michel, V.; Thirion, B.; Grisel, O.; Blondel, 
M.; Prettenhofer, P.; Weiss, R.; Dubourg, V., Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python. Journal 
of machine learning research 2011, 12 (Oct), 2825-2830. 
121.  Colby, S. M.; Nunez, J. R.; Hodas, N. O.; Corley, C. D.; Renslow, R. S., Deep learning to 
generate in silico chemical property libraries and candidate molecules for small molecule 
identification in complex samples. Analytical Chemistry 2019. 
122.  Pettersen, E. F.; Goddard, T. D.; Huang, C. C.; Couch, G. S.; Greenblatt, D. M.; Meng, E. 
C.; Ferrin, T. E., UCSF Chimera—A visualization system for exploratory research and analysis. 
Journal of Computational Chemistry 2004, 25 (13), 1605-1612. 
123.  Trott, O.; Olson, A. J., AutoDock Vina: Improving the speed and accuracy of docking 
with a new scoring function, efficient optimization, and multithreading. Journal of 
Computational Chemistry 2010, 31 (2), 455-461. 
124.  Dallakyan, S.; Olson, A. J., Small-Molecule Library Screening by Docking with PyRx. In 
Chemical Biology: Methods and Protocols, Hempel, J. E.; Williams, C. H.; Hong, C. C., Eds. 
Springer New York: New York, NY, 2015; pp 243-250. 
125.  Gu, J.; Gui, Y.; Chen, L.; Yuan, G.; Lu, H.-Z.; Xu, X., Use of natural products as 
chemical library for drug discovery and network pharmacology. PloS one 2013, 8 (4), e62839-
e62839. 
126.  Wishart, D. S.; Feunang, Y. D.; Marcu, A.; Guo, A. C.; Liang, K.; Vázquez-Fresno, R.; 
Sajed, T.; Johnson, D.; Li, C.; Karu, N.; Sayeeda, Z.; Lo, E.; Assempour, N.; Berjanskii, M.; 
Singhal, S.; Arndt, D.; Liang, Y.; Badran, H.; Grant, J.; Serra-Cayuela, A.; Liu, Y.; Mandal, R.; 
Neveu, V.; Pon, A.; Knox, C.; Wilson, M.; Manach, C.; Scalbert, A., HMDB 4.0: the human 
metabolome database for 2018. Nucleic Acids Res 2018, 46 (D1), D608-D617. 
127.  Richard, A. M.; Williams, C. R., Distributed structure-searchable toxicity (DSSTox) 
public database network: a proposal. Mutation Research/Fundamental and Molecular 
Mechanisms of Mutagenesis 2002, 499 (1), 27-52. 
128.  Barber, C. B.; Dobkin, D. P.; Dobkin, D. P.; Huhdanpaa, H., The quickhull algorithm for 
convex hulls. ACM Transactions on Mathematical Software (TOMS) 1996, 22 (4), 469-483. 
129. 

Jones, E.; Oliphant, T.; Peterson, P., SciPy: Open source scientific tools for Python. 2001. 

 

36 

130.  Daina, A.; Michielin, O.; Zoete, V., SwissADME: a free web tool to evaluate 
pharmacokinetics, drug-likeness and medicinal chemistry friendliness of small molecules. Sci 
Rep 2017, 7, 42717-42717. 
131.  Banerjee, P.; Erehman, J.; Gohlke, B.-O.; Wilhelm, T.; Preissner, R.; Dunkel, M., Super 
Natural II—a database of natural products. Nucleic Acids Res 2014, 43 (D1), D935-D939. 
132.  Barupal, D. K.; Fiehn, O., Generating the Blood Exposome Database Using a 
Comprehensive Text Mining and Database Fusion Approach. Environmental Health 
Perspectives 2019, 127 (9), 097008. 
133.  Caspi, R.; Altman, T.; Billington, R.; Dreher, K.; Foerster, H.; Fulcher, C. A.; Holland, T. 
A.; Keseler, I. M.; Kothari, A.; Kubo, A.; Krummenacker, M.; Latendresse, M.; Mueller, L. A.; 
Ong, Q.; Paley, S.; Subhraveti, P.; Weaver, D. S.; Weerasinghe, D.; Zhang, P.; Karp, P. D., The 
MetaCyc database of metabolic pathways and enzymes and the BioCyc collection of 
Pathway/Genome Databases. Nucleic Acids Res 2013, 42 (D1), D459-D471. 
134.  Centre, T. M. I. Bovine Metabolome Database. http://www.cowmetdb.ca/ (accessed Sept 
6). 
135.  Djoumbou-Feunang, Y.; Fiamoncini, J.; Gil-de-la-Fuente, A.; Greiner, R.; Manach, C.; 
Wishart, D. S., BioTransformer: a comprehensive computational tool for small molecule 
metabolism prediction and metabolite identification. Journal of Cheminformatics 2019, 11 (1), 2. 
136.  DS, W. FooDB: the food database. FooDB version 1.0. http://foodb.ca (accessed July 2). 
137.  Enamine REAL Database. https://enamine.net (accessed Aug 13). 
138.  EPA, U. Distributed Structure-Searchable Toxicity (DSSTox) Database. 
https://www.epa.gov/chemical-research/distributed-structure-searchable-toxicity-dsstox-database 
(accessed July 1). 
139.  EPA's National Center for Computational, T., ToxCast Database (invitroDB). 2019. 
140.  Gateway, L. M. L. LIPID MAPS In-Silico Structure Database (LMISS). http://lipidmaps-
dev.babraham.ac.uk/data/classification/x_LM_classification_exp.php (accessed June 21). 
141.  Gaulton, A.; Hersey, A.; Nowotka, M.; Bento, A. P.; Chambers, J.; Mendez, D.; Mutowo, 
P.; Atkinson, F.; Bellis, L. J.; Cibrián-Uhalte, E.; Davies, M.; Dedman, N.; Karlsson, A.; 
Magariños, M. P.; Overington, J. P.; Papadatos, G.; Smit, I.; Leach, A. R., The ChEMBL 
database in 2017. Nucleic Acids Res 2017, 45 (D1), D945-D954. 
142.  Hastings, J.; Owen, G.; Dekker, A.; Ennis, M.; Kale, N.; Muthukrishnan, V.; Turner, S.; 
Swainston, N.; Mendes, P.; Steinbeck, C., ChEBI in 2016: Improved services and an expanding 
collection of metabolites. Nucleic Acids Res 2016, 44 (D1), D1214-D1219. 
143.  Horai, H.; Arita, M.; Kanaya, S.; Nihei, Y.; Ikeda, T.; Suwa, K.; Ojima, Y.; Tanaka, K.; 
Tanaka, S.; Aoshima, K.; Oda, Y.; Kakazu, Y.; Kusano, M.; Tohge, T.; Matsuda, F.; Sawada, Y.; 
Hirai, M. Y.; Nakanishi, H.; Ikeda, K.; Akimoto, N.; Maoka, T.; Takahashi, H.; Ara, T.; Sakurai, 
N.; Suzuki, H.; Shibata, D.; Neumann, S.; Iida, T.; Tanaka, K.; Funatsu, K.; Matsuura, F.; Soga, 
T.; Taguchi, R.; Saito, K.; Nishioka, T., MassBank: a public repository for sharing mass spectral 
data for life sciences. Journal of Mass Spectrometry 2010, 45 (7), 703-714. 
144. 
L. J.; Hanson, A. D.; Fiehn, O.; Tyo, K. E. J.; Henry, C. S., MINEs: open access databases of 
computationally predicted enzyme promiscuity products for untargeted metabolomics. Journal of 
Cheminformatics 2015, 7 (1), 44. 
145. 
Huynh, J.; Zhou, Y.; Arndt, D.; Djoumbou, Y.; Liu, Y.; Deng, L.; Guo, A. C.; Han, B.; Pon, A.; 

Jeffryes, J. G.; Colastani, R. L.; Elbadawi-Sidhu, M.; Kind, T.; Niehaus, T. D.; Broadbelt, 

Jewison, T.; Su, Y.; Disfany, F. M.; Liang, Y.; Knox, C.; Maciejewski, A.; Poelzer, J.; 

 

37 

Wilson, M.; Rafatnia, S.; Liu, P.; Wishart, D. S., SMPDB 2.0: big improvements to the Small 
Molecule Pathway Database. Nucleic Acids Res 2014, 42 (Database issue), D478-D484. 
146.  Keseler, I. M.; Mackie, A.; Santos-Zavaleta, A.; Billington, R.; Bonavides-Martínez, C.; 
Caspi, R.; Fulcher, C.; Gama-Castro, S.; Kothari, A.; Krummenacker, M.; Latendresse, M.; 
Muñiz-Rascado, L.; Ong, Q.; Paley, S.; Peralta-Gil, M.; Subhraveti, P.; Velázquez-Ramírez, D. 
A.; Weaver, D.; Collado-Vides, J.; Paulsen, I.; Karp, P. D., The EcoCyc database: reflecting new 
knowledge about Escherichia coli K-12. Nucleic Acids Res 2016, 45 (D1), D543-D550. 
147.  Kim, S.; Chen, J.; Cheng, T.; Gindulyte, A.; He, J.; He, S.; Li, Q.; Shoemaker, B. A.; 
Thiessen, P. A.; Yu, B.; Zaslavsky, L.; Zhang, J.; Bolton, E. E., PubChem 2019 update: 
improved access to chemical data. Nucleic Acids Res 2018, 47 (D1), D1102-D1109. 
148.  MolMall MolMall Database. http://www.molmall.net (accessed July 16). 
149.  Psychogios, N.; Hau, D. D.; Peng, J.; Guo, A. C.; Mandal, R.; Bouatra, S.; Sinelnikov, I.; 
Krishnamurthy, R.; Eisner, R.; Gautam, B.; Young, N.; Xia, J.; Knox, C.; Dong, E.; Huang, P.; 
Hollander, Z.; Pedersen, T. L.; Smith, S. R.; Bamforth, F.; Greiner, R.; McManus, B.; Newman, 
J. W.; Goodfriend, T.; Wishart, D. S., The human serum metabolome. PloS one 2011, 6 (2), 
e16957-e16957. 
150.  Ramirez-Gaona, M.; Marcu, A.; Pon, A.; Guo, A. C.; Sajed, T.; Wishart, N. A.; Karu, N.; 
Djoumbou Feunang, Y.; Arndt, D.; Wishart, D. S., YMDB 2.0: a significantly expanded version 
of the yeast metabolome database. Nucleic Acids Res 2017, 45 (D1), D440-D445. 
151.  Sajed, T.; Marcu, A.; Ramirez, M.; Pon, A.; Guo, A. C.; Knox, C.; Wilson, M.; Grant, J. 
R.; Djoumbou, Y.; Wishart, D. S., ECMDB 2.0: A richer resource for understanding the 
biochemistry of E. coli. Nucleic Acids Res 2016, 44 (D1), D495-D501. 
152.  Schläpfer, P.; Zhang, P.; Wang, C.; Kim, T.; Banf, M.; Chae, L.; Dreher, K.; Chavali, A. 
K.; Nilo-Poyanco, R.; Bernard, T.; Kahn, D.; Rhee, S. Y., Genome-Wide Prediction of Metabolic 
Enzymes, Pathways, and Gene Clusters in Plants. Plant Physiology 2017, 173 (4), 2041. 
153.  Sterling, T.; Irwin, J. J., ZINC 15 – Ligand Discovery for Everyone. Journal of Chemical 
Information and Modeling 2015, 55 (11), 2324-2337. 
154.  Sud, M.; Fahy, E.; Cotter, D.; Brown, A.; Dennis, E. A.; Glass, C. K.; Merrill, A. H., Jr.; 
Murphy, R. C.; Raetz, C. R. H.; Russell, D. W.; Subramaniam, S., LMSD: LIPID MAPS 
structure database. Nucleic Acids Res 2007, 35 (Database issue), D527-D532. 
155.  Wishart, D.; Arndt, D.; Pon, A.; Sajed, T.; Guo, A. C.; Djoumbou, Y.; Knox, C.; Wilson, 
M.; Liang, Y.; Grant, J.; Liu, Y.; Goldansaz, S. A.; Rappaport, S. M., T3DB: the toxic exposome 
database. Nucleic Acids Res 2015, 43 (Database issue), D928-D934. 
156.  Wishart, D. S.; Feunang, Y. D.; Guo, A. C.; Lo, E. J.; Marcu, A.; Grant, J. R.; Sajed, T.; 
Johnson, D.; Li, C.; Sayeeda, Z.; Assempour, N.; Iynkkaran, I.; Liu, Y.; Maciejewski, A.; Gale, 
N.; Wilson, A.; Chin, L.; Cummings, R.; Le, D.; Pon, A.; Knox, C.; Wilson, M., DrugBank 5.0: a 
major update to the DrugBank database for 2018. Nucleic Acids Res 2018, 46 (D1), D1074-
D1082. 
157.  Wishart, D. S.; Lewis, M. J.; Morrissey, J. A.; Flegel, M. D.; Jeroncic, K.; Xiong, Y.; 
Cheng, D.; Eisner, R.; Gautam, B.; Tzur, D.; Sawhney, S.; Bamforth, F.; Greiner, R.; Li, L., The 
human cerebrospinal fluid metabolome. Journal of Chromatography B 2008, 871 (2), 164-173. 
158.  Wishart, D. S.; Li, C.; Marcu, A.; Badran, H.; Pon, A.; Budinski, Z.; Patron, J.; Lipton, 
D.; Cao, X.; Oler, E.; Li, K.; Paccoud, M.; Hong, C.; Guo, A. C.; Chan, C.; Wei, W.; Ramirez-
Gaona, M., PathBank: a comprehensive pathway database for model organisms. Nucleic Acids 
Res 2019. 

 

38 

159.  Workbench, M. Metabolite Database. 
https://www.metabolomicsworkbench.org/databases/metabolitedatabase.php (accessed June 21). 
 

 

39 

